---
title: clrzmq 2.2.1 Released
layout: default
category: Code
tags: [clrzmq, zeromq]
redirects:
 - /post/14315348829/clrzmq-2-2-1-released
---

*Update: I made a small mistake with the NuGet packages and had to bump to v2.2.1*

After three arduous weeks of pounding on the keyboard and screaming at my monitor, I have finally whipped clrzmq into a releasable state. I may be exaggerating for dramatic effect. Nonetheless, **clrzmq 2.2.1** has been released on [NuGet][nuget] ([x64][nuget-x64]) and on [GitHub][repo].

This release includes libzmq 2.1.10 and it will likely be the last major release for clrzmq 2.x. Minor releases for bug fixes and libzmq updates are sure to come, but the focus is now on 3.x.

But before we talk about the future, let's talk about the present.

<!-- end_preview -->

## What Changed

This was primarily a bug-fix release, but there were a few additions to the API, courtesy of Fredrik Holmström. Fredrik also made significant improvements to the non-blocking `Socket.Recv` method.

Here's a list of changes, in no particular order:

* New socket options: `RECONNECT_IVL_MAX`, `RECOVERY_IVL_MSEC`
* Added `XPUB` and `XSUB` socket types
* Added all Posix error codes to the `ERRNOS` enum and fixed some incorrect values (more on this later)
* Added various null parameter and result checks
* \[fholm\] Added `Send`/`Recv` overloads that accept message buffers as parameters, allowing for reduced memory allocation and GC pressure if message sizes are well known
* \[fholm\] Modified the `Recv(int timeout)` function to not spin on the CPU until timeout expires; avoids locking a single core system completely and greatly reduces resource consumption on multicore systems
* Made `Socket(SocketType)` constructor obsolete (more on this later)
* \[fholm\] Added a manual reset event to the `Device` class called `DoneEvent` which will be signaled when the recieve loops end
* \[fholm\] Added `Device` constructors that take `Context` objects as parameters

## App-wide Context Considered Harmful

One of the relics left in the codebase is a static, application-wide Context object. It is initialized and ref-counted in the `Socket(SocketType)` constructor and is deallocated upon socket disposal.

Though <del>magical</del> convenient, it opens the door for subtle bugs and strange behaviour, especially in multi-threaded applications. Therefore, the offending `Socket` constructor has been marked obsolete, as have the `Device` constructors that rely on it.

**From now on, always manage your `Context`s explicitly.**

## Known Issue &mdash; Error Codes

While adding the full set of Posix error codes to the `ERRNOS` enum, I discovered that the extended error codes (e.g., `ENOTSUP`, `EPROTONOSUPPORT`) have been incorrectly defined for BOTH Windows and Posix environments for the entire lifetime of this project.

This is because Windows, Linux and MacOS use different constants for all of those extended error codes. Any solution I can come up with would probably break backward compatibility, so I've left it for version 3.

For the time being, **extended Posix error codes will continue to be wrong on all platforms.**

## Next Major Version

As previously mentioned, this release marks the end of the 2.x branch. In just a few short weeks, we fixed some significant flaws, added a few new features and did **a lot** of clean-up &mdash; I even migrated most of my test suite from [netzmq][netzmq] to clrzmq. The list of pull requests is basically empty and most of the remaining issues list will involve backward-incompatible changes, so the time is right to begin working on version 3.

These are the changes I'd like to make in the next version:

* Support libzmq 3.1 and 2.1
* Target .NET 4.0 and Mono 2.10+
* Make the API more .NET-y and test friendly
* Follow the Microsoft class naming guidelines for APIs &mdash; `Context -> ZmqContext`, `Socket -> ZmqSocket`, etc.
* Add robust Any CPU platform support
* Better error checking & reporting and more accurate error codes
* Test all the things!
* Integrate device support into the main project

The above is probably not a complete list, but my overarching goal is this: to make .NET and Mono first class development platforms for ZeroMQ.

[nuget]: https://nuget.org/packages/clrzmq
[nuget-x64]: https://nuget.org/packages/clrzmq-x64
[repo]: https://github.com/zeromq/clrzmq
[netzmq]: https://github.com/jgoz/netzmq

