---
title: clrzmq 3.0.0-alpha1
layout: default
category: Code
tags: [clrzmq, zeromq]
redirects:
 - /post/17286514525/clrzmq-3-0-0-alpha1
---

The first alpha release of clrzmq 3.0 is now available for wild experimentation (from [GitHub](https://github.com/zeromq/clrzmq/downloads) or [NuGet](http://nuget.org/packages/clrzmq)). This is what I've been hacking on for the last 3 months and I'm pretty happy with it so far.

Note that this release breaks backward compatibility, hence the major version bump. After careful deliberation, I decided that providing a more idiomatic .NET API that follows Microsoft's guidelines for class libraries was more important than preserving the old API. My hope is that the new API, along with better documentation and updated examples, will push ZeroMQ further into the .NET ecosystem. The 2.2 branch will continue to be maintained, but no new features will be added.

But enough rambling &mdash; let's talk about the shiny parts.

<!-- end_preview -->

## What's New

As I mentioned above, 3.0 offers several improvements over the 2.x releases. These include ZeroMQ 3.1 compatibility, Any CPU support, .NET-friendly naming standards, czmq- and jzmq-like message/message part abstractions, better Device and Poller APIs, and vastly improved error reporting across platforms. Also, unicorns, rainbows, and leprechauns.

### ZeroMQ 3.1

clrzmq now supports both the ZMQ 3.1 and 2.1 branches. From the application's point of view, this really only manifests in the socket options, as 3.1 adds several, renames a few, and removes one or two. The 2.1-exclusive socket options remain available but are marked as Obsolete. They will throw a `ZmqVersionException` if used with ZMQ 3.1.

It was a minor coincidence that clrzmq 3.x corresponds with ZMQ 3.x; ideally, support for future libzmq versions will not result in a new major version of clrzmq. In other words, do not rely on the clrzmq version to indicate which libzmq version it supports.

Packaged releases of clrzmq include a `libzmq-version.txt` file that contains the bundled libzmq version.

### Any CPU

If you're on Windows/.NET, Any CPU is now the only platform target for clrzmq. Mono builds only support x86 for the time being[^mono].

32- and 64-bit libzmq binaries are packaged with the clrzmq assembly and may be unloaded to disk on application startup. Custom builds deployed locally or system-wide take precedence over packaged builds; unloading will only take place if libzmq.dll cannot be found using standard `LoadLibrary` rules.

This should be very good news for anyone who has to deal with heterogeneous deployment environments and other idiosyncrasies of 64-bit Windows installations. For example, one user was having issues due to a ReSharper test runner using a 32-bit context in spite of their project's x64 platform target. For them and for everyone else, Any CPU support will mean one less thing to worry about during development and deployment.

### Naming Standards

The [Microsoft naming guidelines](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms229026.aspx) list several rules to follow when designing APIs to help library users avoid qualifying class names with a namespace. Most of these rules were violated in the 2.x API:

* `ZMQ.Socket` conflicts with `System.Net.Sockets.Socket` from the core namespaces.
* `ZMQ.Exception` conflicts with `System.Exception` (this was particularly bad).
* `Context` is a generic type name which could easily lead to conflicts in common scenarios.

And that covers most of the old API. To fix this, the new API renames some of the core ZMQ classes as follows:

* `ZMQ.Socket` -> `ZeroMQ.ZmqSocket`
* `ZMQ.Context` -> `ZeroMQ.ZmqContext`
* `ZMQ.Exception` -> `ZeroMQ.ZmqLibException`, `ZeroMQ.ZmqSocketException`

The rationale behind the new naming conventions is that the `ZeroMQ` namespace describes the product/project while the `Zmq` prefix describes the protocol. This aligns well with `HttpContext`, `TcpClient`, `XmlReader`, etc.

At least, that's the story I'm sticking to.

### Message Abstractions

Some of the other bindings, notably czmq and jzmq, provide abstractions over message-parts and multi-part messages, which they call Frames and Messages, respectively. These concepts are now available in clrzmq as the `Frame` and `ZmqMessage` classes along with a suite of socket extension methods for sending and receiving these objects atomically. Full API documentation and examples will follow at a later date.

Aside from providing additional metadata about the contained message buffer(s), these classes allow for convenient serialization targets for client applications. For example, you could create a `Serialize<T>(T obj)` extension method that returns a `ZmqMessage` with one Frame for the type name and another Frame for the object body.

### Device and Poller APIs

Previously, the Poller API was wedged into the Context class and there were two separate Device APIs. One might say it was a little bit messy.

Both of these situations have been cleaned up in 3.0.

There is now a `Poller` class that can poll over a collection of `ZmqSocket` classes. Attach to the `ReceiveReady` and `SendReady` events as needed on each socket prior to calling `Poll` and things should work as expected. Gone are the days of futzing around with PollItems and polling directly off of the Context object.

ZMQ 3.1 has done away with built-in devices and `zmq_device`, leaving this for bindings to implement. Therefore, the obsolete `Socket.Device` class has been removed and the alternate Device API has been enhanced and moved into the core clrzmq assembly.

The enhancements include a fluent configuration interface for device sockets as well as an optional constructor parameter to control whether the device will run in blocking or threaded mode (threaded is the default).

### Error Reporting

Last but not least, error reporting has been significantly enhanced in version 3.0. Aside from renaming the atrociously named `Exception`, posix-style error codes are now accurate for all platforms and operating systems. Due to cross-platform differences, these error codes cannot be exposed via an enum, so they have been made static readonly ints. This should have minimal impact on client code.

As for internal error handling, I have given a lot of attention to proper handling of non-exceptional error codes, such as `ETERM` and `EINTR`. Client code should never have to inspect an exception to determine whether an operation should be retried &mdash; this is already taken care of in the binding.

## What's Next

As adoption of 3.0 slowly ramps up, I expect there may be a few minor API changes and issues to deal with. Ideally, the official release will coincide with the ZMQ 3.1 stable release.

Version 2.2 will still be maintained, but no new features or support for ZMQ 3.1 will be added. This will hopefully encourage more users to upgrade to 3.0. In the next few days, I plan to post a quick 2.2 to 3.0 upgrade guide.

In the meantime, download it, play with it, and report any issues or suggestions on [GitHub](https://github.com/zeromq/clrzmq). Pull requests are always welcome.

[^mono]: I've been unable to get 64-bit Mono builds to work on my 64-bit Ubuntu VM. I've yet to determine the source of the problem, as [Mono apparently supports AMD64 on Linux](http://www.mono-project.com/Supported_Platforms).

